Some leagues have rule modifications to meet the level of players participating or time limitations. Those modifications are listed here.

If a league isn't listed on these pages, normal FIBA rules apply.

For all leagues serviced by CBOA, make sure all jewelry is removed, shirts are tucked in, and ninja style headbands are removed.

ASAA Undergarment Directive for High School Games


Please check your email for a very important message from the Executive regarding undergarments in all high school games.  This is a crucial directive from the ASAA and it is important that we ensure a uniform and consistent application of this directive to uphold the integrity of the game.


You can review the CBOA and ASAA memo regarding undergarments for high school games.


Please contact cboaeducation@gmail.com if you have any comments, questions, or concerns. 

Player Participation Reminder

As a reminder in the context of officiating games, it is crucial to emphasize the role and final authority of the league's governing body responsible for overseeing sports. The league is entrusted with the authority to make determinations regarding eligibility for participation in their sports programs and team assignments.

If there is any doubt, err to the side of letting the players play within the spirit and rules of the game. After the game file a game report with the relevant concerns to the CBOA Vice President.

Alberta Hoops Summit (U18 Boys) (Updated June 18)
FIBA rules with the following modifications

Timing (Pool Play): 4 x 10 minute quarters, running time  with stop time in the last 2 minutes of the 4th quarter

Timing (Playoffs - Quarter finals on (games on Sunday)): regular FIBA timing in effect (4 - 10 minute quarters, stop time)

Time Outs: 1 time out in first Half & 2 in the second half

10 minute warm-up

Time Between Quarters: 1 minute

Half time: 5 minute

Overtime 3 minutes

Shot Clock: FIBA shot clock with 14 seconds for offensive rebounds, officials keep shot clock

FIBA College 3pt line

No Mersey rule at the moment. 

Alisa Suykens Memorial Tournament (Okotoks) (Updated May 23)
FIBA rules will apply with the following modifications:

Age Division Rules:

On court Warm-ups will be granted according to the amount of time between games.  We have allocated time between games.  The tournament host will be in contact with the waiting teams to determine an appropriate on court warm-up time.   

 

In the event of a team arriving late (5 minutes or more from the scheduled game time), the other team will be granted 10 points and the game shortened in order to stay on time.


If a coach gets ejected from any game, that coach can no longer coach in the next game and can’t be in the venue.  If the ejection happens in the final game, then if that coach returns, the coach will still have to serve their suspension.


All Age Levels

3 minute half time

4 timeouts with 2 in the first two quarters and 2 in the last two quarters

If overtime is needed, the game will be determined by the first team to score 4 points.  1 timeout will be granted in overtime.



U11 Girls/Boys

A size 5 ball will be used 

Games will be played Four (4) on Four (4)

Rims will be set to 8 1/2ft

Foul line: 2ft closer than marked foul line

Four 8 minute, stop-time quarters

No 20 point press rule


U13 Girls/Boys

a size 6 ball will be used

No Zone defense in the front court

20 point no press rule

Four 9 minute, stop-time quarters


U15 Girls and HS Girls

a size 6 ball will be used

20 point no press rule

U15 Girls will not play zone in the front court

Four 10 minute, stop-time quarters


U15 Boys and HS Boys

a size 7 ball will be used

20 point no press rule

U15 Boys will not play zone in the front court

Four 10 minute, stop-time quarters

Alley Oop Basketball Tournament (Updated April 15, 2025)
FIBA rules will apply with the following modifications:

Warmup will be 5 - 10 minutes long. Time will be shortened if the tournament is running behind.

Two - 24 minute halves running time. Stop in the last minute of the first half. Stop time in the last half 2 minutes if score is within 20 points.

Clock stops for time outs and injuries.

3 minute half time

1 Time out per half.

Overtime is 2 minutes stop time and 1 time out.

No break between second half and overtime.

Additional Overtime: first to score. Starts with a jump ball. No Break. No timeouts.

During the half time break, one official can administer the half court shots (Splash for Cash contest).

Bonus on the eighth foul. 1 shot for for 2 points.

If fouled on 2 point shot and shot missed, one free throw for 2 points.

if fouled on 3 point shot and shot missed, one free throw for 3 points.

If fouled and shot made, one shot for 1 point.

3 point line is being used at all levels of play.

14 second shot clock off offensive rebounds

Technical foul: automatic 2 points and ball at point of interruption.

Unsportsmanlike foul: automatic 2 points and thrown opposite table in the front court.

No pressing at 20 point lead (doesn't apply to U18 platinum divisions)

Mercy rule: at 40 points stop keeping score on clock, only on paper

No zone defense in the U11 and U13 divisions.

U9/11 modifications:

Foul line is 3 feet closer

No intentional double teaming or trapping the ball

Screening is allowed.

5 on 5 (U11 platinum and gold)

4 on 4 (U11 silver and bronze and all U9 levels)

10 foot baskets (U11 Platinum and Gold)

8.5 foot baskets (U11 Silver and Bronze and all of U9)

Pressing is allowed for U11 Boys Platinum Only

No zone defense (unless you are playing short a player)

Forfeit Rule: 5 minute grace period.

2 Technical fouls is an ejection for both coaches and players.

Coach technical fouls count toward the team fouls.

If spectators are disrespectful to Refs, Coaches, Players, or Scorekeepers, this will result in a technical foul given to their team. They may also be removed from the facility.

Battle at Big Rock (Updated May 11)
FIBA rules with minor modifications.

2 Timeouts per half, no overtime timeouts

Inside 3 point line being used for guys and girls and age groups

No Mercy rule for U17. 

Mercy rule:  no press when up by is up 21 points or more

14 seconds  shot clock reset on offensive rebounds - with some leeway for U13 B

9 minute stop time quarters

Warm up is a minimum of 8 minutes.

U13 9 minute stop time

Overtime - first to 4 points starting with a jump ball, fouls carry over, no time out

Length of half time- 3 minutes

1 minute between quarters

CJBL(Updated Oct 28)
CJBL is playing FIBA rules with minor modifications.

Currently the no charge semi-circle is not being used

CHSSL (Updated November 28, 2024)
CHSSL is playing FIBA rules with ASAA and league rule modifications.

ASAA 14 second Shot Clock after offensive rebound

4 - 10 minute quarters running time with the last 2 minutes stop time

No stop time when a team has a lead of 20 points. If the team gets within 10 points, stop  time is to be used again.

Each quarter a team receives 1 time out. Teams get only 1 time out in the 1st and 2nd quarters. If the team doesn't use their time out in the 3rd quarter, it carries over to the 4th quarter.

Be aware of swearing by players. We have been asked to enforce a no swearing policy. Let coaches know if someone is swearing during play.

CSMBA Rule Modifications (Updated August 21, 2025)
CSMBA plays FIBA rules. 

They have modified the Overtime rules.

7 minutes stop time 

First team to 7 wins

If still tied after 7 minutes, game is recorded as a Tie. Unless in Playoffs, then the next team so score wins

CSWBA (Senior Women's Masters) (Updated Nov 22)
CSWBA plays FIBA rules. 

If a team has fewer the 5 players, the other team can provide as many players as possible their to the other team so that the team with fewer players can play with 5 players.

If both teams make 5 players per team by borrowing players from the other team, we will referee the game as usual.

CSWBA (Senior Women's Div 2) (Updated Sept 13)
FIBA rules will be used with the following modifications:

Default: five players within 15 minutes (the FIBA rule)

Calgary Corporate Challenge (CCC) (Updated September 15)
Calgary Corporate Challenge is a 3x3 tournament using FIBA 3x3 rules with modifications.

Modifications

Length of game: 25 minutes running time, no target score goal

All games end at the buzzer, regardless when the game actually begins.

Substitutes are  permitted when there is a check ball situation.

Time outs: one 20 second timeout per game. clock doesn't stop during the time out.

Shot Clock: 12 second shot clock

Scoring: basket counts 2 for a shot from the 2 point area and 3 points from the 3 point area, just like 5-person.  Foul shots are 1 point.

 Change of possession (steal, defensive rebound): one pass before shot attempt, including the pass to clear .

Take back line (after any change of possession): any where past the 3 point line.

After a score the play continues immediately, no check ball or throw in from out of bounds.

Overtime and second overtime: 2 minute OT or first to 5 points.

Third overtime: each team takes 3 shots (alternating teams). Most shots wins. If still tied continue alternating shots until 1 teams has scored 1 more point than the other team from the same number of shots.

Foul out: 4 personal fouls.

Teams will line up for  free throws. No check ball if the shot is made. The defensive team will get the ball under the basket and play as usual.


FIBA rules (spotlighted)

Shot clock: 12 seconds

After scoring: play from goal, no inbound or check ball

Team fouls FIBA leading to Penalty (Bonus)

Foul shots: 1 for made basket, 2 for missed basket with shot from the 2 point area, 3 for missed basket with shot from the 3 point area (just like 5-person FIBA)

Calgary Catholic Junior High (Seniors) (Updated January 7, 2025)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.

Coaches should meet before start of game with official to discuss safety and players who may not be playing (see  12). 

The game shall consist of four (4) quarters of ten (10) minutes. 

a. Last three (3) minutes of the game will be stop time. (This includes when a basket is scored.) 

b. Last one (1) minute of the first three quarters will be stop time. 

c. There shall be intervals of one (1) minute between the first and second period (first half), between the third and  fourth period (second half) and before each extra period. 

d. There shall be a two (2) minute half time break. 

e. The clock will be stopped for time outs and injuries. 

f. Each team will have two (2) time outs per half (no carry-over) and one (1) in overtime. 

g. Overtime – 3 minutes stop time. 

The trapezoid key, only if properly marked, will be used. (in the case of a narrow and a trapezoid use trapezoid) 

Shot-clock Referees will count twenty-four (24) seconds

Teams may not employ a full court press when they have a lead in the score of ten (10) points or more. The  referee will stop play for violation and warn the offending coach and player(s). A technical foul will be assessed for  continued violation. 

Teams may not use a zone defence in the defensive zone. The referee will stop play for violation and warn the  offending coach and player(s). A technical foul will be assessed for continued violation. 

The Home team shall provide a satisfactory game basketball (SIZE 6). 

Style of uniform shall be optional. However, each player on the floor must be wearing a team shirt or jersey with  visible numbers on the front and back. The team may use any uniform numbers with a maximum of two digits. No  player will be allowed to play without a uniform. The style of shorts is optional, however, the following are not  allowed: cut-offs, jams or tear-away shorts, pockets, pockets turned inside-out, pocket openings, slits, tears in the  material or belt loops. All teams are expected to have at least five (5) pinnies or reversible jerseys available if both  teams are wearing the same colour uniforms. The home team will wear pinnies. If pinnies are not available, the  coaches and official will create a workable solution. 

Tee shirts may be worn underneath jersey as follows: 

a. A white tee shirt. 

b. A tee shirt with the same colour as the majority colour of the jersey. 

c. Sleeves and leggings are allowed under uniform. 

The three (3) point line will be played in gyms where the line is properly marked (minimum twenty-one (21) foot  radius). 

All body jewellery (including studs of any kind) and watches are strictly forbidden. No taping of hair accessories  and jewellery is allowed. Religious medals must be taped inside the player’s jersey. 

All players dressed for a game must be given court time. CCJHSAC guiding principles Professional conduct to  inform opposing coach if a player will not participate due to injury (indicated on score sheet) or for disciplinary  reasons. NOT MONITORED BY OFFICIALS 

Scorekeepers should only be spoken to when clock is stopped. This includes coaches, players and any spectators. 

When the score reaches a 30 point differential there will be a 1 minute Coaches conference time-out to  review protocols for continuing. (Not charged to either team) 

a. No fast break. 

b. Keep playing however no more points added to scoreboard. Score continues to be kept on game sheet. (If  differential is less than 30 scoreboard will be updated at time-out or break). 

c. No shot before 10 second call (team ahead). 

d. Running time.

STRATEGIES TO EMPLOY FOR TAUNTING 

• Immediate substitution of player. 

• Conversation with player. 

• Second offense sits for the rest of half, or entire game. 

Calgary Catholic Junior High (Updated February 5, 2025)
FIBA rules with the Calgary Catholic Junior High (Senior) and the following Junior level modifications.

Full and half court presses are not permitted in Junior Play

Our playoff games are only 45 minute time slots so it has been suggested that we run two – 18 minute halves.  Coaches can agree if they want the last 1 minute of each half as stopped time.

Calgary High School Athletic Association (CHSAA) (Updated November 20, 2024)
Calgary High School Athletic Association's tournament is using FIBA 5x5 rules with  ASAA and CHSAA modifications.

For ASAA Modifications see the ASAA Modifications section.

CHSAA Modifications

T-shirts can be worn but must follow garment guidelines. All undergarments, headbands, etc. must conform to color requirements where all members of the must have the same color. They can be any color they like, but all players must have the same matching colors.

Calgary Independent Schools Athletic Association (CISAA) (Updated January 9, 2025)
Calgary Independent Schools Athletic Association (CISSA) uses FIBA 5x5 rules with  ASAA and CISSA modifications.

For ASAA Modifications see the ASAA Modifications section.

CISSA Modifications

Half Time: 5 minutes

Overtime: Start with a jump ball (not possession arrow). If the game is not decided after a second overtime, Overtime begins with a jump ball and the first team to score wins.

No more than 15 team members are eligible to play.

The shot clock after an offensive rebounds is reset to 24 seconds (not FIBA's 14 seconds).

Two minutes between quarters (not modified by ISAA).

Unknown: Time between quarters.

Unknown: Time allocated for warm up between games

No t-shirts are allowed. FIBA guidelines haven't been modified by CISSA.

Calgary Indohoops Tournament (Updated July 12 2025)
The tournament will use FIBA rules except for the following modifications:

Two halves, 22 minutes each, running time.

Clock stops the last 1 minute of the first half and the last 2 minutes of the second half.

if the score difference is over 15 points, the clock will run the last two minutes of the second half.

Clock stops for timeouts.

2 timeouts per half, 1 minute long.

four minute half time.

Free throws: 1 free throw worth 1, 2, or 3 points. In the last 3 minutes of the game, there is no modification.

Overtime is 3 minute period starting with a jump ball.

5 personal fouls before fouling out.

Bonus on the eighth team foul of the half.

Calgary Korean Basketball Association (Updated October 3)
Calgary Korean Basketball Association's tournament is using FIBA 5x5 rules with modifications.

Modifications

Length of game: 4 four 8 minute quarters,  running time

Last 2 minutes of 4th quarter will be stop time, including when a basket is scored

1 minute between quarters

3 minute half time break

Clock stops for timeouts and injuries

1 time in first half and 2 time outs in the second half

Time outs are 30 seconds long

Overtime: 3 minutes running time

Special scoring mod: any female players born before 1978 will add points to some of their scores (fyi), players with have green tape marked on their jersey


On Septmber 28 4pm and 5pm: gold and bronze medal games only

Length of game: 4 four 10 minute quarters, running time

Time will stop in the last minute of the first 3 quarters

Two time outs each half

Special Modification: 

For recreation purposes, any female players or players who were born in 1980 or earlier will receive an additional point(+1) for any field goal they make, excluding free throws. For example, a 2-point shot will count as 3 points, and a 3-point shot will count as 4 points. This does not apply to foul shots. Such players will be predetermined and marked with green masking tape on their jerseys before game starts. 

All players must wear matching uniforms. If any player on a team does not have a matching uniform, the opposing team will receive two free-throw shots before the jump ball.

Calgary Public (CBE) Junior High (Updated October 24)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.


1.	Playing time

a) 	Four 10-minute quarters running time; the last 1-minute of each quarter is stop time.

b)	The clock will stop after baskets only in the last minute of the fourth quarter and overtime (NOT the last 2 minutes as per FIBA)

c) 	Half time will be 3 minutes.  30 seconds between quarters.


2.	Each team is entitled to 2 timeouts each half.  You may not carry over timeouts to the next half.  In playoffs only, you may have 1 timeout for the entire overtime period.


3.	Clock will only stop for time outs or injuries, except for the final minute of each quarter which is stop time.


4.	Overtime will not be played during regular season.  In playoffs, when overtime is necessary, the clock will be turned off and the teams will play until ONE TEAM MAKES 4 POINTS during that overtime period. 


5.	Whatever time remains in the 1-hour time slot per game will be used as warm-up for the following game. A minimum 5 minute warmup is to be given for warmups, even it if means the game starts after the 1 hour. time slot. Games are not to end early nor are they to be moved up to be played before the allotted game start time. (modified Oct 4)


6.	Where a 3-point line exists in a gym (even if it is an illegal one) it will be used. No taped lines will be permitted. If there is no 3-point line, the referees can only award 2 points for long shots.   


7.	There is a 24-second “shot clock” as handled by the referees.  As we have no shot clocks, the referees shall verbally warn the offense when there are 10 seconds remaining on the 24-second count.


8.	Each quarter, two free throws will be awarded on the 5th team foul and subsequent fouls in the quarter.


9.	Senior teams will shoot free throws from the 15-foot free throw line.  The junior teams will be allowed to shoot from a 14-foot free throw line, but only if the 14-foot line is painted on the floor. No taped lines will be permitted.


10.        Teams must play “man-to-man” defense in their backcourt.


11.	Junior Teams may NOT press at any time during the season. Senior Teams may press at any time during the season. 


12.      Senior teams may choose to zone press but only in their frontcourt. Once a team has crossed the centre line, the defending team must revert to man-to-man defense.


13.        There is a “fifteen point mercy rule” in effect for seniors.  Teams that are leading by 15 points or more may not use full court presses.


14.	Once the score reaches a differential of 30 points, please use 30 Point Rule guidelines for remainder of the game.

		

15.        Junior teams and senior girls’ teams will use a size 6 basketball; senior boys teams will use a size 7 ball.


16.        As per FIBA and CBOC guidelines on religious jewelry (FIBA and CBOC guidelines state that there is no religion that requires the wearing of religious jewelry), no jewelry of any kind is to be worn. [CBE Junior High has made their coaches and ADs aware of our stance on this issue. They may modify the rule and we will let you know if this rule changes.]


17.        Late Team Arrivals – If both teams are late, allow a 3 minute warm up and then adjust quarter times depending on time remaining.  If one team is late, allow 3 minute warm up, late team is given a technical foul, then adjust quarter times depending on time remaining. The FIBA forfeit time limit, 15 minutes, will be used to determine if a game is forfeited for not having enough players to start the game.


18.       Player roster sizes are set at a maximum of 15 players per team.


30 Point Rule

CMSLAA Basketball 2023

When the score reaches a 30 point differential there will be a 1 minute Coaches conference time-out to review protocols for continuing (not charged to either team).  Both coaches and referees are involved in the conference.  Protocols include:

Slowing down the play and eliminating the fast break.


Running time for the remainder of the game, except during time outs or injuries.


Score will be taken off the score board, but time and team fouls will remain on the board.  Score continues to be recorded normally on the score sheet.  The score on the sheet at the end of the game is the result that is submitted.


If score differential becomes 20 points or less, scorekeepers will put the score back on the board during a time out or in between quarters.  At this point, normal play can resume. 


*The coaches time out is meant to provide coaches with a moment to discuss what tactics the leading coach will employ for the remainder of the game.  It also allows the scorekeepers time to set the score board to 0 on each side, and remind scorekeepers of the expectations for the rest of the game.

Calgary Surge 1x1 (Updated October 23, 2025)
FIBA 3x3 rules will be used with the following modifications.

● Scoring: 1s and 2s

● Win Condition: First to 7 points OR 5:00 running clock

● Possession: Rock–paper–scissors at start; alternating on scores (check ball at the top of the key on scores, player who didn't score gets the ball)

● Overtime (Ties after 5:00): Sudden-death (next basket wins - Possession goes to the player who did not start

with the ball in regulation.)

● Clear after rebounds/steals beyond the arc

● Fouls: No free throws

● Late Rule: “Late by 2 minutes = forfeit.

Calgary Surge 3x3 (Updated September 9, 2025)
FIBA 3x3 rules will be used with the following modifications.

1) A 24 second shot clock will be used. 

2) The shot clock will begin when the rebound is controlled.

3) A 10 second warning will be issued.

4) 14 second shot clock will be used after offensive rebounds.

Crowther Memorial Junior B (Updated Nov 30)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.

10 minute running quarters

stop time the last two minutes of the 4th quarter and overtime

half-court defense (no press)

player to player defense only (no zone defense)

5 minute half time

Edge Invitational (Updated Oct 13)
Edge Invitational is playing FIBA rules with 9 minutes running time as the only modification.

: no rule modifications, here's some highlights

: 14 second Shot Clock after offensive rebound

: inside 3 point line is being used

: 9 minute quarters

Full Court Events (Fall Club League: U13, U15, U17) (Updated Oct 19)
Full Court Events Club games are using modified FIBA rules.

Do not use these rule modifications for the games played at Edge School. They are not associated with this league.

Full Court Events U13 (Grade 6/7), U15 (Grade 8/9), U17 (High School Grades 10/11/12).

All games consist of TWO 24 minute halves.

Clock stops ONLY for free throws and  in the last 2 minutes of the second half if the score difference is 10 points of less. Clock will run if the score difference is over 10 points (11 points or more).

No overtime. Games will end in a tie.

1 time out in the first half and 2 time outs in the second half

Half time is 3 minutes

FIBA shot clock (14 seconds for offensive rebounds)

presses allowed at U15 and U17 levels, not at the U13 level

Penalty (bonus) is on the 8th foul in each half

Free throws when fouled in the act of shooting: one shot worth 1, 2, or 3 points (If shot is made, free throw is for 1 point. If a 2 or 3 point shot is missed, free throw is worth 2 or 3 points respectively.)

6 personal fouls to fouls out

No mercy rule at any level: (no indication whether a mercy rule should be implemented)

Use the inside line for gyms that have two 3 point lines (no  guidance provided by coordinator so we will go with the usual high schools rules)

U13 (Grade 6/7) only

no zone press is allowed

no half court zone defenses

Genesis Spring League (Updated April 12)
Edge Spring League is playing FIBA rules with some modifications.

9 min stop time quarters

No Mercy rule

No press rules

If there are 2 lines marked in a gym, the outside line is the 3 point line to be used

Timeouts are FIBA, 2 and 3

Overtime is 2 minutes long, one time out each

14 seconds after an offensive rebound (FIBA rules)

Half Time: 5 minutes

Genesis Classic (Girls and Boys) (Updated May 16, 2025)
Genesis Classic tournaments are playing FIBA rules with some modifications.

Each game will consist of two 22-minute running time periods. The clock will be stopped only for time-outs  throughout the game. EXCEPTION: During the final ONE (1) minute of the first period and the final TWO (2)  minutes of the second period, the clock will be stopped for all rules mandated stopped clock situations  (including free throws and time-outs) if the score is within 20 points. 

Each team will be allowed one (1) full time-out in each half (Time-outs do NOT carry over). Timeouts must  be called at dead balls, FIBA rules apply, not NCAA.  

Halftime will be 2 minutes.

All teams must be ready to play at the designated times. If time permits, warm-up may be available at the game site before the start of the game.

 There is a 5-minute forfeit rule in effect throughout the tournament. If a team is not on site and ready to play  five minutes after the designated game time, the tournament director may at his/her discretion, thereafter,  rule a forfeit. (Note: Any forfeited game will count towards the minimum five game guarantee.) 

No Press Rule: A team that is 20 points ahead cannot full court press. The team may pick up its opponent  after they have crossed the half court line. One warning will be given to the bench prior to a technical being  assessed. The only Division this does not apply to is the boys and girls HS Platinum divisions. 

Zones: Full Court and Half Court zones are allowed in U17 and U15 divisions. U13 team’s divisions are not allowed to run any Zones half court.  U13 can only zone press in the Full court with no more than 2 players trapping the ball at one time. There are no zones allowed for the U11 divisions.

Bonus situation will begin on the 8th team foul of each half. Teams will shoot one foul shot worth 2 points for the remainder of each half. 

When a player is fouled while shooting, they will get one foul shot worth 2 points, or if it is a three pointer,  1 shot worth 3 points. If they are fouled on a continuation, they will get one shot for their extra 1 point.  

Any player or coach receiving two technical fouls in one basketball game will be ineligible to play or coach  for the remainder of that game. Any player or coach receiving a third technical foul during the tournament  will be unable to participate for the remainder of the tournament.  The tournament Director may  adjust or alter the suspension rule if they deem it so. 

Technical fouls will be penalized with  automatic two (2) points and the ball at half court.

Intentional fouls will be penalized with two (2) shots from  the free throw line and the ball where the intentional foul occurred.

In case of overtime, a two-minute stop time period will be played. If the game is still tied at the end of the first overtime, a second 1-minute stop time period will be played. If the game is still tied after the second  extra period, then a sudden death period will be played with the first team to score any type of points as the  winner. (Note: In the championship game, there will be as many overtimes stop-time periods as necessary  to determine a winner). Each team will be allowed (1) Full time-out for each overtime period.

ISAA Junior High (Updated Nov 30)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.

Grade 8/9 Boys will be using a Size 7 Basketball in league play.

4 x 8 minute. Stop time. 5 minute HALF time break.

Bonus (Penalty) – 2 shot penalty will occur on the 4th foul of each quarter

Zone defences are allowed

Full court presses are allowed, **Please stop the full court press if there is a 20 point diff

Overtime – 3 minutes stop time. We shouldn’t have games that end in a tie. Start the overtime with a jump ball, not possession arrow.

ISAA High School (Updated January 23, 2025)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.

2 minutes between quarters (as per FIBA)

5 minute half time

the time between games should be determined by the starting time of the second game (ie. 5:30 pm). the time between games should be a minimum of 10 minutes. If there is more time between the end of the first game and the starting time of the second game, the time between games should be set so that the second game starts at the scheduled time (ie, 5:30 pm).

JLL Charity 3x3 (Updated April 5)
FIBA 3x3 rules with the following modifications.

Start the game with a coin toss. The winning team can choose to take possession of the ball at the start of the game or take the first possession of a potential overtime period.


4. The game is a single period of 15 minutes running time. The winner is the first team to score 21 points or the team with

the highest score at the end of the 15 minutes. A tie in regulation leads to an untimed overtime period, which is won

by the first team to score 3 points in overtime. Note that if a game is tied at 20 points at the end of the regulation time

of 15 minutes, then you move into overtime rules and must score 3 additional points. Games only need to be won by 1

point.

5. Game play starts with the defensive team exchanging the ball with the offensive team behind the Arc (“Checking the

Ball”). This exchange is also used to restart the game from any dead ball situation.

6. After Checking the Ball at the top of the Arc, the ball is live; the player starting with the ball can choose to dribble,

shoot or pass.

7. Fouls during the act of shooting inside the Arc are awarded 1 free throw, whilst fouls during the act of shooting behind

the Arc are awarded 2 free throws. Teams that are fouled, while not in the act of shooting are awarded possession

of the ball. After the foul shot, the ball is live and the offense does not have to clear the ball behind the Arc but the

defense does.

8. Possession alternates after every made basket. There is no “Keeps After 3” rule. However, if a player is fouled in the

act of shooting and he/she makes the basket despite the foul, then the basket counts and the offensive team retains

possession with no foul shots (No and 1’s)

9. If the defense gains possession of the ball within the Arc, by a steal, a block or a rebound, the team must move the ball

behind the Arc before being allowed to take a shot.

10. After a made shot or free throw, play restarts with a player from the non-scoring team taking the ball to the top of the

arc and Checking the Ball with the defensive team.

11. Substitutions can occur only in a dead ball situation such as fouls, out of bounds or after a basket. Players can call for

a sub during any dead ball situations. No action from referees or table officials is required.

12. Each team is allowed one 30 second timeout. Game time will continue to run unless the time out is taken in the final 2

minutes of the game, in which case the clock will be stopped.

13. Individual personal foul counts are not kept. In other words, players cannot be disqualified on the basis of personal

fouls. However, a player who commits two technical fouls is disqualified for the remainder of that game.

14. Technical fouls result in two free throws plus possession of the ball.

15. Referees have the final decision in any dispute between teams and/or players. All other FIBA regulations shall apply.

In the event of a conflict between these rules and the FIBA regulations, these rules shall govern.

Mount Royal Spring League (Updated May 7)
FIBA rules with the following modifications.

Games will be 4 quarters at 10 minutes each, stop time. 1 Minute between Quarters and 3 minutes at Halftime.

Each team will have 2 time outs in the first half and 3 in the second. No timeouts will carry over

OT will be 2 minute stop time with 1 time out per team. If teams are still tied after the first OT the game will end in sudden death format (first team to score wins)

14 seconds after an offensive rebound

Scores will kept by a representative from each team playing (2).

Mercy Rule – In the 2nd half when a team is up by 30 Points or more, the time will run (no stopping clock) and the team that is up can no longer press.  If / when the lead gets below 30 then the time can again be stopped when play is dead.

There will be no swearing or disrespecting of players, coaches or referees from any players, parents or coaches. If this becomes a continuous problem, that team may be asked to leave the league.

Any player, coach, or fan who is removed from a game will be suspended for the next league game.  2 suspensions in a season will result in removal of that individual from the league.

Nelson Mandela Invitational (Updated November 14, 2024)
Nelson Mandela Invitational is using FIBA rules with ASAA and other modifications.

: minimum 8 minute warm up. Referees and tournament directors can use discretion to change the warm-up time

: 2 minutes between quarters

: 10 minute half time

: regular FIBA timeouts

: overtime: 2 minutes, jump ball, sudden death (first to score any made basket (free throw, 2/3 pt)

: overtime: tie score after 2 minutes, free throw  contest, one free throw shooter keeps shooting until winner; both teams shoot free throws each round; winner when one shooter makes and one shooter misses

Rocky View Schools Grade 6 (Updated Mar 21)
Grade 6 Basketball Rules Modifications

1. All games are played according to FIBA rules.

2. Games, which are scheduled in half-hour time slots, consist of two 12-minute halves (running time), with a one-minute half time. Each team is allowed a five-minute warm-up before the start of each game.

2. Teams gaining possession defensively are allowed free progression to center. The former offensive team must retreat to its defensive area and wait for the ball to be brought to center before coverage can occur. Should a player violate the press rule and gain possession of the ball, the referee blows the whistle, awards the ball to the offensive team and cautions the offender. To avoid excessive time loss, if a player defends another player prior to the center line, the referee cautions the defensive player while play continues.

3. Once possession has been established after a rebound, the new defensive team may not intercept a pass until the ball has crossed the center line. In the event that a ball is purposely or inadvertently intercepted, the referee blows the play dead and the ball is inbounded on the sideline.

4. Ten foot baskets are used by both boys and girls.

5. The foul line is four feet closer to the basket, marked with tape.

6. A size 6 ball is used.

7. Teams are allowed one time out per half, one minute in length. The clock is topped during time

outs. Coaches may call time outs from the bench.

8. If, following a violation, a team is awarded possession in their back court; the referee does not handle the ball. The referee must handle the ball if a team is awarded possession in the front court.

9. Change of possession. The visiting team is given the first change of possession (indicated by an arrow on the clock or at the bench.) Possession of held balls alternates between teams for the game. The only jump ball is at the beginning of the game. The second team list on the schedule is considered the visiting team (i.e. 1 vs. 7 where 7 is the visiting team’s score.)

10. One a non-handled throw-in, only the team being awarded possession may initiate substitution. However, if they do so, the other team may also substitute. On a handled throw-in, either team may initiate substitution.

11. Five seconds in the key is called.

12. No dunking or goaltending is allowed.

13. There is no overtime, a tie stands.

14. A running score is sufficient.

15. Necklaces, rings earrings, etc. may not be worn by players on the court.

16. Uniforms should be similar in colour for the tops and are to be numbered.

Rocky View Schools Junior  B (Updated Feb 23)
Jr. A Basketball Rules Modifications

1. All games are played according to FIBA rules.

2. Each half is 16 minutes in length, running time. Stop for injuries and time outs.

3. The last two minutes in each half is stop time.

4. There are five time outs in a game.

5. There is no pressing. Man-to-man defense must be played. No zone defense it permitted.

6. Once control of the ball is established, the defending team must vacate to half court.

7. The host school marks the foul line 1.5 feet closer to the basketball hoop. A player is permitted to shoot free-throws from behind this line.

8. All teams use a size 6 ball.

Rocky View Schools Junior High (Updated December 24, 2024)
Jr. A Basketball Rules Modifications

1. All games are played according to FIBA rules.

2. Any type of pressure is allowed. After the offensive team reaches their front court, the defense must revert to man-to-man coverage unless double teaming the ball carrier. The referee will stop play for violation and warn the offending coach and player(s). A technical foul will be issued for continued violation.

3. Defenders may not employ front court press when they have a lead in the score of 15 points or more. The referee will stop play for violation and warn the offending coach and player(s). A technical foul will be assessed for continued violation. 

4. Double-teaming the ball carrier is allowed. A player may not be double teamed unless they are in possession of the ball. The referee will stop play for violation and warn the offending coach and player(s). A technical foul will be issued for continued violation.

5. Schools have no jersey restrictions with regard to numbering or undershirts. T-shirts are allowed, but must be the same color.

6. Warm-up is dependent on the tournament timing and is at the official’s discretion.

7. Regular season games consist of quarters of 10 minutes. The last two minutes of the fourth quarter will be stop-time. In the event that a team is up by 15 points, no stop-time will occur.

8. A one-minute break will be given between each quarter and half time is to be five minutes long.

9. Two one-minute time-outs per half per team.

10. In the event of overtime the first team that scores four points will be declared the winner.

11. Jr. A Boys play with a size 7 basketball, girls with a size 6.

12. No jewelry is allowed (no taping, no exceptions).

Rundle Junior High Tournament (Updated Jan 4)
Rundle Junior High Rules Modifications

Grade 8/9 Leagues

i. FIBA rules – 4 x 8 minute. Stop time. 5 minute HALF time break.

ii. Bonus (Penalty) – 2 shot penalty will occur on the 4th foul of each quarter

iii. In the last two minutes of 4th Quarter - Please Stop clock after each basket.

iv. Always handle in the backcourt (except after basket)

vi. Zone defences are allowed

vii. Full court presses are allowed

**Please stop the full court press if there is a 20 point diff

viii. Overtime – 3 minutes stop time. We shouldn’t have games that end in a tie. Start the overtime with a jump ball, not possession arrow.

ix. Time Outs are called through the scorekeepers table. Time is STOPPED during time outs (hence the name Time OUT).

Grade 7/8 Leagues

x. FIBA Rules – 4 x 10 minute run time, last minute of each quarter is stop time. 5 minute HALF time break.

xi. Bonus (Penalty) – 2 shot penalty will occur on the 4th foul of each quarter

xiv. Zone defences are prohibited

xv. Full court defences are prohibited

xvi. Overtime – 3 minute stop time. We shouldn’t have games that end in a tie. Start the overtime with a jump ball, not possession arrow.

xvii. Time Outs are called through the scorekeepers table. Time is STOPPED during time outs (hence the name Time OUT).


GRADE 7 & 7 / 8 DEFENSE

2.3.3 No intentional double-teaming or traps on the ball carrier is allowed.

2.3.4 Any player without the ball cannot be double-teamed.

2.3.5 Each defensive player must be responsible for guarding one offensive player.

2.3.6 On Ball Defense - When defensive players are guarding a player with the ball they need to be at a maximum of two arm length away from the player with the ball (Canada Basketball calls this gap distance). No excessive sagging on defense on or off the ball, this is discerned by referees or a league official.

2.3.7 Off Ball Defense - A defensive player must move spots on the court when the offensive player they are covering moves spots on the court. Off ball defenders should not be standing in the middle of the key, they to move as the player they are guarding moves and or the ball moves, and should only have one foot in the key if their offensive check is off the lane (more than 2 steps of the key). No excessive sagging on on defense on or off the ball, this is discerned by referees or a league official.

2.3.8 Help Side Defense - A player may leave their check to help on an opposing player who is entering the key with the ball. If the ball leaves the key so should the help side. Stopping the ball in the key is not considered a double team.

Sherwood School Junior High Tournament (Updated Oct 6)
Sherwood School Junior High's tournament is using CMLSAA (CBE Jr High) rules with the following modifications

Two 20 minute halves with the last 2 minutes of each half stop time

Each team will be given 2 timeouts per half to be used any time during the half. Time outs cannot be carried forward.

Presses are allowed at any time during the game, but zone press can only be in their front court, once the other team has crossed the centre line, the defending team must revert back to man to man defense.

The 30-point rule is in effect

If there is a tie, there will be a 2-minute overtime; coaches will have one time out.

Every player dressed sitting on your bench must play

BONUS will occur on the 8th team foul.

Shooting Star Tournaments (Updated Apr 27)
ASAA high school rule modifications will be used with the following modifications:

Eight minutes will be given for warmup and 3 minutes for half time, unless the tournament is ahead of schedule.

All games will consist of four 9 minute stopped time quarters. One minute between quarters.

U13 Aces Division at Hounsfield will play 7 minute stopped time quarters. One minute between quarters.

Two timeouts per half. Timeouts cannot be carried over into the second half or overtime. 

Overtimes will be decided with the first team to 4 declared the winner. Each team will receive one 30 second timeout.

Please provide one parent or other volunteer to help score keep or time each of your games. Please have them ready to go as soon as the previous game is over.

There is no mercy rule. But as a sportsmanlike gesture, coaches are encouraged to take the press off if you are up 20 . We want all games to be positive for both teams. It is early in the season so not all teams have spent much time on press offense. (Nothing for our officials to monitor or enforce.)

In the case of a late team, the game will be shortened so that the game will end at the normal time, due to the fact that we are not able to go over the time.

If two 3point lines are marked, the inside line is to be used.

Shot clock after offensive rebounds is reset to 24 seconds.

St. John Paul II Collegiate Junior High (Updated January 14, 2025)
FIBA rule modifications will be used with the following modifications:

Games will be 4 8-minute quarters stop time

2 time outs per half

1 minute between quarters

2 minute half time

Overtime:

4 minute run time

Overtime starts with a jump ball

One timeout

Overtime periods continue until a winner is decided.

Full court man and zone pressure is allowed

Man defense must be played in the defensive court (the defenders back court)

20 point mercy rule

no full court press

St. Martin de Porres Jr Boys (Updated November 28)
ASAA high school rule modifications will be used with the following modifications:

Games will be 4 10 minute quarters run time

1 minute between quarters

2 minute half time

Overtime:

5 minute run time

No timeouts

jump ball to start overtime

If still tied after 5 minutes, each player selects one player for free throw attempts shootout

Playoffs

4 10 minute quarters stop time

one minute between quarters

2 minute half time

Playoffs game times: 11:30 am onward

Western Crown Presented by Genesis Basketball (Updated May 21, 2025)
FIBA rules will be used with the following modifications:

9 minute quarters, stop time

if a team is up by more than 25 points in the 4th quarter, the game will be running time.

No stop pressing rules

U13 division

No half court zone allowed

Full court press is allowed.

No press rule after 30 points

W.I.N. Tournament (Updated May 23)
FIBA rules will be used with the following modifications:

All divisions

Short warm ups (5) and half (2) depending on schedule.

 3 pt line is in effect for all group. Closest 3pt line with be in use

Overtime: 1st OT - 3mins; 2nd OT 1.5mins or first to go up 4 points

Mercy Rule: at 30pts run the clock and scoreboard off)

U17 games

U17 normal FIBA high school rules

shorter warm up (5 minutes) and halftime (2 minutes or so, depending on schedule, maybe up to 5)

FIBA timeouts (2 and 3 per half)

High school shot clock (24 seconds offensive rebound)

No pressing after 20 points


U13 Girls

Two 20 minute halves, running time

Stop last 2 minutes of each half 

1 time out in first half, 2 time outs in second half

No pressing after 20 points

24 second shot clock after offensive rebound


U10 Boys

2 - 20 minute halves

stop last 2 minutes of each half

1 TO in 1st 1 in second

No pressing

24 second shot clock after offensive rebound

William D. Pratt Maverick Madness Tournament (Updated September 18, 2024)
FIBA rules with CMLSAA (CBE Junior High) modifications will be used with the following modifications:

1 timeout in overtime.

 When overtime is necessary, the clock will be turned off and the teams will play until ONE TEAM MAKES 4 POINTS during that overtime period. 

When the score differential is 30 points or more, play is stopped and the scoreboard is reset as 0-0. Running score kept on paper only. If the differential falls to 10 points or less, play is stopped so that the score can be put on the scoreboard.

Visions Tournaments (Updated May 31)
FIBA rules will be used with the following modifications:

9 minute quarters, stop time

3 minute half time (5 minutes if we’re ahead of schedule)

Warm up will be 5 - 10 minutes (adjusted to meet available time)

2 timeouts per half

Most gyms only have 1 three point line—girls can use the closer 3 point line & boys the further one if a court has both

No mercy rule

14 seconds after an Offensive rebound

Overtime is "first team to 4 points or 3 minutes, whichever comes first.” The 3 minutes will be running time except for free throws and time outs (1 time out per team in overtime). If the score is still tied after 3 minutes, we will go to “next point scored wins” (sudden death). 

Rules of Play for U11 Boys & Girls

Games will be played 4-on-4

Size 5 Ball

8’ 6” basket

Foul Line – 3 feet closer to the basket than the regular foul line

Games will be the same length of time as all other VBA Kick Off games – that is, 9 minute stop time quarters with a 5 minute half time

Time outs will be the same as all other VBA Kick Off games – two (2) in the first half and two (2) in the second half

Substitutions are at the coach’s discretion – remember that this is an important developmental stage where every kid needs to play –we will not enforce playing time rules, however, a coach is fully expected to ensure that all kids play relatively equal time – player development by far supersedes the score or outcome of the game

Man to Man defense ONLY – no zone defense allowed

No intentional double teaming on the ball unless it is near the basket on a drive (in the key) – double teaming at  alf court or out on the perimeter is not allowed

Absolutely no ball screens and no off ball screens – no screens, period

No full court press

All other rules will be the same as outlined in the Vision Tournament Rules information. If there is an obvious U11 Rule missing in this outline, please let Mark Hogan know.

ASAA (Updated November 20, 2024)
ASAA plays FIBA rules with minor modifications.

These rules apply to junior and senior varsity high school league play.

These are the rule modifications for the current basketball season. they were taken out of their policy handbook or where communicated to us.

No more than fifteen team members are entitled to play.

10-minute half-time permitted (FIBA states 15 minutes).

Only offensive rebounds of a live ball will reset to 24 seconds (FIBA states 14 sec.). In all other instances FIBA shot clock rules apply. The original memo sent to coaches, Nov 22, contained an error in the wording.

Note: ASAA does adhere to the FIBA rule that offensive team throw-ins in the
frontcourt that are the result of a NEW offensive possession reset to 14 seconds (i.e.:
missed shot goes out of bounds without any team establishing control, after a turnover,
advancing the ball to the frontcourt after a time-out with 2:00 minutes or less remaining
in the 4th quarter or overtime, after any Unsportsmanlike Foul).

Also note: ASAA adheres to the FIBA rule of a 24 sec. shot clock reset on defensive
possessions.

The ASAA maintains the use of the NCAA 3-point line at 6.32m. ( FIBA is 6.75m).

The ASAA does NOT adopt the use of the FIBA no-charge circle.

The standard key that will be used at ASAA Provincial Championship level will be the
FIBA block key. (Gyms without these markings will use the trapezoid key.) Taping the correct key onto the floor is permitted.

Religious headpieces are permitted and do not have to match the uniform color.

Undergarments must be compression or tight fitting, they can't be loose fitting.

All undergarments, headbands, etc. must conform to color requirements where all members of the must have the same color. They can be any color they like, but all players must have the same matching colors.

Hair beads can be worn provided they meet CBOC's direction on how they can be worn. They must be worn tight to the head. The hair can not be hanging loose. It can be tied into a bun or something similar.